hello my name is Dave Emery and it's my
pleasure and privilege to present once
again Christopher Simpson the author of
among other titles the splendid blonde
beast money law and genocide in the 20th
century published in softcover by the
common courage press in 1995 and also
the landmark blowback published in
hardcover by Wyden Feld and Nicolson
copyright 1988 Chris welcome back once
again to our airwaves hello Dave even
though you published splendid blonde
beasts in 92 and blowback in 88 many of
the things that you've touched on in
those books are once again becoming well
not once again but are becoming
increasingly relevant with some of the
recent news stories now in particular
the whole issue of genocide and war
crimes is something that is very much on
the focus now with mister Pinochet
wonder if you would reflect on the
situation of Pinochet and some of his
institutional attachments against the
background of your work and splendid
blond beast yeah what has happened since
1945 is a series of developments in
international law that have not yet
entirely gelled but nonetheless are
desirable developments the very fact
that Pinochet has been arrested that it
appears that he will be extradited that
it appears you will be put on trial
these are in a certain sense
revolutionary advances in international
law what has happened is that through
United Nations treaties and through the
process of what's called customary
international law there have been a
handful of crimes that are so serious so
terrible and so universally recognized
as crimes that as any dictator any
general so forth is is obligated to to a
bay those laws international laws and
and examples of this are that slavery is
against the law against Internet
the law in that a person can be tried
for the slave trade or owning slaves
anywhere in the world
genocide falls into the same category
torture falls into the same category and
in a handful of other crimes of
comparable seriousness organized masked
rapes fall into the same category
although one might might categorize
those as as a form of torture but but
the point being is that a small number
of extremely serious crimes have been
recognized as international crimes that
people including Pinochet can be held
accountable for one of the factors that
has entered into the journalistic
discussion an editorial rumination
concerning mr. Pinochet is the fact that
obviously his coup in 1973 was supported
by the United States and the CIA and so
were some of the subsequent activities
of that regime such as Operation Condor
at least to a certain extent tacitly if
not overtly there has been a lot of
speculation that the United States would
be less than enthusiastic about the
trial about the prospect of Pinochet
standing trial I think that that's
probably true the the United States has
has got itself into a difficult bind in
international in a matter of
international law and the gist of it is
this that for more than a century the
Americans have been put themselves
forward as the world's champions of
international law when it suited their
purposes politically for example during
the 1991 Gulf War but have rejected in
principle on constitutional grounds or
claims of constitutional grounds that
they are in any sense subject to
international law when they don't like
the the effects of it and an example
that is the there's a case that grew out
of the iran-contra affair in which the
world court at the hague
and against the United States government
in the matter of mining Nicaraguan
harbors when the Americans basically
thumb their nose at-at the whole process
so the US government's approach to to
international law has has been mixed at
best now along comes the Clinton
administration and one of the principles
that the Clinton administration has put
forward really from its first days is
that it wanted to see the creation of an
International Criminal Court to try
dictators and and people who commit
extremely serious crimes against
humanity and part of the the subtext
there that the political agenda there is
to find means to to put on trial people
that the that the US government regards
as terrorists however at the same time
what what the what has has evolved is
that literally hundreds of countries
around the world have agreed that an
International Criminal Court to try
particularly serious crimes such as
genocide is a a desirable thing is long
overdue is a welcome development by
people of goodwill all over the world
and and there last summer there was
significant progress towards a
relatively independent world Criminal
Court for trying such people the
Americans tried in those negotiations
the most polite thing that can be said
is that they wanted to have it both ways
they wanted to be able to to put on
trial the people that they didn't like
and and protect from trial the people
that they did
so along comes Pinochet I don't see any
particular sentiment within the US
government for protection of Pinochet as
such there have been statements from the
Secretary of State and others to the
effect that that the u.s. government has
as no objection to the extradition of
Pinochet I think part of the reason for
this is Pinochet is is now well into his
80s and and will not be on this earth
much longer nevertheless a trial of
Pinochet inevitably brings into the
public spotlight the role of the CIA in
Chile in the overthrow of the government
in Chile the role of the CIA and and
elements that are even less savory than
the CIA I know that some of your
listeners may may regard that as a
contradiction in terms but but
nonetheless what I'm referring to our
old line Nazi genocide olace such as
Walter Ralph that that those people and
and US agencies to the extent that they
had a direct role in the crimes of the
Pinochet government and crimes I'm
referring here to not just the petty
crimes the systematic looting of the
country which which in the international
law terms is practically a petty crime
but rather the the massacres of unarmed
civilians for example the organized
torture camps the
these types of jennife idle or crimes
against humanity organized rapes of
women prisoners these types of crimes to
the extent that the the CIA participated
in ordered facilitated failed to stop
these activities if they had authority
if the CIA had the ability to stop the
Chilean secret police from torturing
prisoners and they knew that the Chilean
secret police or torturing prisoners the
CIA at that point becomes complicit in
the crime of torture or at least those
parts of the CIA who were in in that
particular position and presumably under
under international law as it presently
stands such people could be put on trial
now whether or not Washington would
would yield them up for trial is is
quite a different question I would be
very surprised if the government in
Washington would would have that much
integrity
well you lude the vaulter Ralph a figure
who was an art war criminal in the Third
Reich and in a sense volta Roth actually
represents something of an element of
continuity between the work that you did
in the spunda blond beast and the
Pinochet case I wonder if you tell us a
little bit about him how he came to
escape justice in world war two and
arrived in Chile right well Walter Rauff
was one of edifice man's most important
aides his particular specialty was the
were were the railroad networks of
Europe and how to manage the process of
actually rounding up Jews from cities
across Europe getting them loaded into
boxcars and getting the boxcars off to
the either slave labor camps or to
extermination camp
he played a similar function in
treatment of Soviet prisoners of war and
other people who were persecuted by the
Nazis at the end of the war there are a
series of very curious circumstances
that leave unanswered questions about
the role of Allen Dulles in particular
in the escape of walter ralph from
europe and we can come back to that in a
moment but for the moment let's continue
on with what is clearly on the record
and what's clearly on the record is that
Ralph
first of all finds refuge in a monastery
that is run by the Vatican he gets a
false passport that gets him to Syria
and from Syria he eventually finds his
way to Chile where he sets up shop as a
so-called anti-terrorism expert
anti-communist expert and participates
in both as an advisor and a trainer or
in a and the almost a grand old man of
fascism if if there is such a thing
during the the Pinochet regime among
Chilean secret police circles now if
you'd like to go into the Dulles
connection to his escape it's really
quite remarkable at sonic's there are
questions here that have not been
answered and so at least for the moment
it's it's wise to to distinguish what is
known from what is not now first let's
talk a little bit about Allen Dulles
because he too could be thought of as
something of a bridge he was of course
as we've spoken about in previous
interviews an attorney with Sullivan &
Cromwell a major Wall Street law firm
then worked for the OSS and later the
CIA
another story that has been in the news
recently concerns collaboration between
General Motors and Ford and the Third
Reich and that too along with people
like Allen Dulles is a major focal point
of spunda blonde beast develop that
further for us if you would sure sure
what splendid blonde beast is is a look
at the interaction between money and the
the law and the development of law you
know law evolves just like any other
human institution the interaction
between money and law when it comes to
laws about crimes against humanity or
war crimes and it it begins in World War
one with the Turkish government's
attempt to exterminate the Armenian
population of of what is today eastern
Turkey and and what is today Armenia
there's now a country it used to be a
Soviet Republican that was an
independent country Armenia the Turks
during World War one carried out a
campaign of genocide against Armenians
mainly by deporting them on forced
marches into the deserts of what are
today
northern Iraq and Syria worthy where the
people perished from exposure to element
disease starvation and similar suffering
well the the question at the end of
World War one the the river one had been
enormous ly expensive enormous ly
destructive obviously to the Armenians
when we were just discussing but but to
the entire world as well and the
question was this was who's going to pay
for it
now even the defeated powers agreed that
a
a country or a military unit that a
committed a war crime was responsible
for making restitution for that war
crime and there was some law about war
crimes that existed at that time there
were Hague conventions and under those
conventions the French went to the peace
conference of the day and wanted a two
hundred billion dollars from the Germans
to to make good the destruction that the
German army had had wrecked in in France
[Music]
the British had comparable claims not as
high as the French but still comparable
claims and and the Americans also had
claims you had early economists who are
now considered practically gods by by
contemporary economists like John
Maynard Keynes made their early career
as advocates of letting the Germans
pretty much off the hook
because they were afraid that that if
the Germans actually paid the bill for
the destruction that they had left that
there would be a revolution in Germany
and there was much talk of you know the
Bolsheviks taking over and so forth but
but the the truth of the matter is is
what they were what what the outside
forces were afraid of was a was a
democratic and national national list
and revolution that that would bring to
power a democratic labor oriented
government labor in the in the
old-fashioned sense of the term not in
the sense of the of the British Labour
Party anyway the the upshot of all this
was
that Alan Bella's brother john foster
dulles who eventually became US
Secretary of State worked a deal with
the other powers in Europe in which war
crimes and crimes against humanity were
defined so narrowly so tightly so
parsimoniously that the the German
financial obligation was quite low and
more importantly when looked at from
historical perspective what that meant
was is that when Hitler began systematic
persecution of Jews when he when the
crystal nock burnings of temples began
when the systematic theft of Jewish
property took began in in Germany and so
on that the outside world said that well
these aren't these aren't war crimes
right they may be unpleasant we don't
like them except our cetera but there's
nothing that we can do about it this was
the American position of the time it was
the British position of the time of the
Slee use of slave labor which is front
and center in the ongoing lawsuit
against Ford and GM was just such a
crime yes absolutely absolutely and part
of this this again returns to the
question of the Turkish persecution of
Armenians Armenians were part of Turkey
they were they were Turkish citizens and
therefore under war crimes law as it
stood at that time it was impossible for
Turks to commit war crimes against the
citizens of their own country it was it
was the way the law was set up you could
only commit a war crime against a
country that you are real with so that
if you if you committed genocide against
your own people
it wasn't criminal now or it had the
appearance of not being criminal now the
the overwhelming majority of powers in
fact every single power at the peace
treaty that ended World War one with the
exception of the United States favoured
as one of the first terms of the peace
treaty that ended World War one a
recognition of a crime against humanity
the genocide of the type that the Turks
had perpetrated against the Armenians
was a crime against humanity that this
was different from a war crime this was
it this was in part a crime that an
organized State committed against its
own people so that when Germany began to
commit and the Americans block this the
American the American representative to
this World War one peace conference
happened to be John Foster Dulles as
uncle Robert Lansing I mean that's in
part how those who was then a very young
man ended up with such influence at this
particular negotiation in Lansing
refused to transmit the stuffs become
rather bureaucratic but through a
variety of bureaucratic mechanisms
Lansing sabotage the will of every other
country in the world of the time on this
issue of crimes against humanity so the
the Armenians got the shaft
the Armenians subsequently were betrayed
in other ways mainly for in exchange for
American oil rights in what used to be
the Ottoman Empire in Saudi Arabia and
Iraq and Iran what are today Saudi
Arabia and the the little desert Sheik
domes and so forth so and you Iraq by
the way the Americans got the oil the
meanings got the shaft when Hitler came
to power he was for the most part and
the Nazis for the most part especially
in the first years were committing
crimes against people who were in fact
Germans they were Jewish but they were
German they were German citizens many of
them were veterans of World War one who
had fought in the German army in World
War one but with the racial ideology of
the Nazis they their property was taken
from them and they were beaten on the
streets the SS would arrest them
arbitrarily and and I think all of your
listeners are reasonably aware of the of
the types of crimes that were were
committed against Jews in Germany now
but from the standpoint of the outside
world from the standpoint of the British
from the Americans and so forth also
from the French these were not crimes
Hitler had legalized them they weren't
war crimes it's because they Germany was
not at war with itself and there was no
such thing as a crime against humanity
it's because the Americans had blocked
it at the end of World War one so as
distasteful as Hitler might have been
there was nothing illegal in an
international sense about what he was
doing and that in turn had two effects
one of them was that despite much kind
of cutting and and sort of
self-righteous rhetoric coming from from
Western countries about what a monster
Hitler was there were great to business
opportunities to be made in Germany and
one of the most lucrative business
opportunities was a stealing property
from Jews where German banks and lawyers
and so forth could force either through
terror or a variety of legal means
a Jewish family to sell its real estate
or its company or it's a little street
corner business whatever its home that
the family's home whatever for a
fraction of its price and this was all
done with all of the you know the papers
and the notary stamps and all the you
know the formalities of conventional
commerce and this reached such a point
and this became so institutionalized
that there were actually bonds traded on
American stock exchanges or bond
exchanges that were de facto Arian
ization bonds where American investors
would purchase this bond and then the
bond company would go and use their
money to participate in the theft of
Jewish property and then pay profits
back to the Americans who had invested
in this particularly
[Music]
disgusting a means of making profits
that process that teamwork if you will
and the relatively small number of
Americans and Germans at the very top of
the social structure in both of those
countries international trade in those
states was hard to do communications
were poor getting across the Atlantic
Ocean was a you know it took a month or
more to get a ship across the Atlantic
Ocean a transcontinental telephone call
was was a you know a major event that
got written up in newspapers for heaven
sakes so doing business internationally
was not at all easy in the in those
years and so the companies involved in
it tended to be the largest and most
powerful companies tended to
be from a small number of industrial
sectors oil certain agribusiness
particularly bananas United Fruit
Company was very active in this machine
tools the the singer sewing machine
company which makes quite a number of
devices including weapons beyond in
addition to its sewing machines or it
did during that period anyway and
Internet IBM in and in a National Cash
Register of the of those years and so
forth were involved in this
[Music]
transatlantic trade also were General
Motors and Ford Motor Company which have
been on the front page of the of major
newspapers and in recent weeks for their
collaboration with the Nazis now anybody
who's who's followed this issue for for
you know anybody who's who's done
intelligent reading about World War two
has known for decades that the Ford
Motor Company and General Motors were up
to their eyeballs in in a variety of
joint projects with the Nazis both prior
to the American entry into the war and
in somewhat different form after the
American entry into the war the this is
not like a big surprise to two people
who - who have you know looked at this
seriously there were hearings even
during World War two by a popular West
Virginia Senator Chris let lets us keep
in Rota we're going to take this up
we're going to take this up on the other
side of our discussion for Kris Simpson
this is Dave Emery saying thanks for
listening
hello my name is Dave and it's my
pleasure once again to present
Christopher Simpson the author of among
other titles a splendid blonde beast
money law and genocide in the 20th
century published in softcover but a
common courage press and blowback the
story of Nazi war criminals being
brought into the United States has not
at subtitle published in hardcover by
Wyden Feldon Nicholson Chris welcome
back once again to our airwaves
hello day now before we left off we were
talking about the collaboration between
German industry and American industry
and also German Finance and American
Finance and how the whole issue of
international law bore on war crimes
Allen Dulles whom we spoke about in the
first side in connection with vaulter
Ralph and the escape of some other war
criminals not only wore the Hat of a
Wall Street lawyer but he also wanted
out of a spy tell us about his OSS role
if you would sure sure he was a the OSS
Office of Strategic Services was the
predecessor of the CIA and it was
created by the president of the time
Franklin Roosevelt to help carry out
World War two Delos was stationed in
Switzerland which was a neutral country
and what his specialty was was making
connections and collecting information
from the various businessmen emigrate
diplomats kind of floating European
royalty without the countries and and
people of this sort who had ended up in
Switzerland during the war the contrary
to to myth Allen Dulles was a very poor
spy and number one didn't turn up very
much good information and number two and
I have demonstrated this from from
looking at his telegrams that are now in
the National Archives rather often would
give away the identity of his spies in
open telegraph traffic so his tradecraft
was not very good but one thing that
that one does did know was who the
bankers and industrialists in German
were and who he had worked with prior to
the war and who he liked and he didn't
like and who he felt was was a
ideological Nazi somebody was a true
believer in Nazism and somebody who he
felt was either an anti-nazi or an
opportunist or yeah those two categories
okay before we go on with Allen Dulles
at this very same time period some other
people who bridge the gap I guess one
could say between the American economic
elite and foreign policy or military
elite also figure into the scenario of
Germany during and after World War two
really be adjudication of Germany after
World War two State Department Robert
Murphy and the Army William Draper I
realized this is a tall order but if you
could give us a little bit of background
on them and then focus in on Germany as
the war ended and how these people acted
in concert okay the gist of it is that
is that these folks were part of the
relatively small
strata at the top of the US social
system that had been most involved in
the international trade with Germany
prior to the outbreak of the war the
American government was deeply split
during the war between those who favored
with Franklin Roosevelt the president of
the time the unconditional defeat of
Nazi Germany and the creation of more or
less rational diplomatic relationships
with the Soviet Union after the war that
was one group the other group favored of
opening what amounted to World War three
with the Soviet Union as quickly as
possible
after 1945 exploiting the advantage of
the atomic bomb exploiting the advantage
of the enormous suffering with the that
the Russian people had suffered at the
hands of the Nazis and in other
geopolitical advantages that the
Americans had had seized
[Music]
Robert Murphy and Draper were most
certainly part of that group of the
latter group George Kennan was part of
the latter group the Dulles brothers
were part of the latter group they had
differences over timing but they didn't
have differences over the essence of the
strategy that that they favored
following a brief lease Kris even if
interrupting but Kenan and Murphy were
part of the riga group within the state
department that we spoke about in our
first interview about splendid blonde
beast and William Draper had been
heavily involved with Dylan read like
Sullivan and Cromwell very much involved
with the American investment in Nazi
industry sure sure absolutely
now odd so so what happened at the end
of the war is that the the way that we
were to was a war of alliances and and
you had strange bedfellows you had the
British uh being allies with with the
Soviet Union which is strange enough and
allies with the French which which have
you know arrived British French
relations may be even stranger but
nonetheless the the basic deal of the
war was that the Allied forces would not
betray one another and find a separate
peace with Germany and instead that they
would fight Germany to the bitter end
until the Germans surrendered
unconditionally well and this was the
only basis on which confidence or an
alliance could be made as early as 1944
the the president of the US Franklin
Roosevelt was clearly very sick and the
forces in America that favored much much
more aggressive stance and even a
outright betrayal of these treaties
wartime treaties with the Soviets became
stronger and stronger by 1945
[Music]
Roosevelt had died his successor Harry
Truman was now president and Robert
Murphy who he mentioned just a moment
ago was acting Secretary of State Robert
Murphy went to the President of the
United States and said that it is as
certain as anything in this world can be
certain that there will be war with the
Soviets sometime soon now this is a and
this is at a time when the Americans and
Soviets are still allies and the ashes
are still smoldering in in Berlin so
clearly at that stage the at the highest
levels of the US government there was a
strong sentiment to take to at a minimum
at a minimum prepare for the possibility
of this conflict and I would argue take
do considerably more than that but but
let's talk with the you know the the
simplest possible explanation what
happened over the next couple years is
that relations between the Americans and
the Soviets deteriorated dramatically
the many people who had collaborated
with the Nazis during the extermination
program in in Russia where the you know
the Nazis went in and invaded Russia and
exterminated millions of Jews and in the
process killed millions and perhaps tens
of millions of Russians Ukrainians
Estonians Latvians Lithuanians other
minority groups in the Soviet Union by
way of setting some of the background to
that prayer Chris a lot of people know
about the millions in PLO Russia alone
just one of the larger Soviet republics
the Germans burned 500 villages with the
people locked in the buildings by way of
giving that some some
ahead yeah this was this was total war
so the in order to carry out that kind
of atrocity in fact you have to have the
cooperation of local collaborators it's
because it's the local collaborators who
who are the fingerman who are the ones
who dragged the Jews out of their house
and lined them up on the edge of the
executioner's ditch and shoot them down
which is precisely what happened all
along the the Eastern Front
when the Nazis retreated back to Germany
these collaborators retreated back to
Germany with them after 1945 the
Americans and the British rather than
returning them to the Soviet Union for
trial as they had agreed by 3d to do
during the war they kept these people in
displaced persons camps where the Nazi
collaborators basically ruled the the DP
camps now this is a complicated story
you know not everybody who is a
displaced person camp is in a displaced
persons camp with a Nazi obviously
plenty of people just got caught in the
wrong place at the wrong time and and
there there was there was enough
suffering to to go around for everybody
having said that what what took place
was that American intelligence and
British intelligence systematically
combed these camps for the people who
had collaborated with the Nazis to put
them back to work in psychological
warfare operations against the Russians
in what was presented as as preparations
for this war that Robert Murphy had
predicted but which were interpreted by
Stalin and by the Russians as the
conduct of this war that Robert Murphy
had predicted in other words they
thought that what the
what the West was doing is as proof of
you know the the the character of
imperialism in the various aspects of
Soviet political doctrine that that
predicted that that that the imperial
power such as England in the United
States we're going to double-cross and
double-cross the Russians so this set
off a spiral of escalation of violence
of betrayal of propaganda psychological
warfare murder the dropping of agents by
parachutes into contested regions where
they attempted to stir up civil war and
you know the whole range of Cold War
double crosses and derring-do and all of
the the the the brinksmanship the the
playing with nuclear weapons as though
they were toys in in international
relations we should note that the
handling of these war criminals not just
the Eastern European and Soviet
collaborators but also some of the
high-ranking Nazi officials who had
participated in these things was a major
factor in helping to draw the lines of
the Cold War oh absolutely absolutely
and you see precisely the same
phenomenon in the Far East as well where
in in Japan in Korea in China and so
forth at the the Western policy on
the emerging cold war had an enormous
impact on what you know how relations
worked in that part of the world and how
things carted themselves out Chris we're
getting to the halfway point on this
side excuse me for interrupting again
but tell us about the Dulles operations
sunrise and let's get back to vaulter
Rob ever so briefly
okay well Walter well figures in
operation sunrise operation sunrise was
at the very end of the wars in 1945 and
the German FF chief in Italy was was
Karl Wolfe and his senior adjutant or
assistant was Walter Ralph I'm Ralph had
one this particular honor rather dubious
honor but by being a particularly
efficient executioner for with with
Ashman now the Catholic Church was very
concerned that speaking of the Vatican
leadership of the church the church is
actually rather decentralized body in
many respects but certainly the Vatican
leaders viewed communism as or the Red
Army as a Satan on earth I mean nothing
nothing less than that so the the Pope
and the leading archbishop of the time
went to the Nazi SS on the one hand and
went to Allen Dulles on the other hand
and said let us make an arrangement
under which wolf and his senior aides
will receive amnesty that the Americans
rather than the Russians will take
control of Central Europe which is
directly to the north and slightly to
thee to the east of northern Italy and
in this way block the advance of the Red
Army
who was who were closing in on Germany
coming from the east it also quite
likely would have set off a war between
the Americans and the Russians and them
in Central Europe but but that that
fortunately did not come to pass so
there was much back and forth about
these negotiations and Allen Dulles
presented himself as a big hero and it
is remembered in the spy war is
supposedly this very clever spy master
that had organized this operation
fundrise the reality of the situation
was is that Operation sunrise did not
shorten the war by even a single day and
that it precipitated a crisis of trust
between the Americans and the Russians
that was very important in setting off
the Cold War and what was happening is
is that the Americans under with
Dallas's you know connivance
were were making this kind of separate
peace deal a side deal with the Germans
to double-cross the Russians to take
control very large part of Central
Europe and this is precisely a violation
of that fragile treaty that had held
together the anti-nazi Coalition in the
first place and Ralph well figures into
sunrise and Ralph was was the go-between
man Ralph was the guy who trotted the
messages between the the archbishop and
the FF general and Ralph was the guy who
trotted the messages between the SS
general and Allen Dulles and eventually
Walt Volta Ralph according to Amnesty
International what we certainly know he
landed in Chile Amnesty International
received numerous reports in the 1970s
of the volta Ralph assisting the
Pinochet regime with the torture code
interrogation unquote of prisoners yes
that's right and other people who had
played similar roles other people who
had been involved in operation sunrise
Nazi criminals including Carl wolf by
the way Carl wolf was a guy
who helped set up the Treblinka death
camp which was arguably the most
horrifying place on earth of of those
years and perhaps of the century is
certainly a major war criminal Karl
Wolfe got off on on bogus charges
technicalities his other major aides got
off on a variety of really quite bogus
shifting them from from one prison to
the next and into a mental hospital and
then out of Italy in in the Switzerland
and back and forth and back and forth
you know this type of thing and Ralph
disappeared into South America where he
as you say ended up as a an advisor to
the terror government under Pinochet
meanwhile just as a side point you had
the crossbar be a Nazi criminal accident
France followed somewhat the same route
and it's up in Bolivia where he also was
active in in teaching the Bolivian
secret police Nazi style methods and the
Nazi style torture cross Barbie was
eventually captured and tried in France
and and the the main aspects of his case
are a matter of public record this is
not you know some kind of speculation on
my part this has come straight out of
the US government documents and out of
the trial record also reflect on some of
the early period in which the Contra
cocaine connection was being formulated
Chris a person who figures both in
blowback and in the splendid blonde
beast is a the aforementioned Carl wolf
there has been recent attempt in some of
the press to resurrect the rid the
reputation of Jill McCarthy I think I'm
thinking of a column by Ethan Braunger
I may be mispronouncing that vro double
NER and both the New York Times and at
least one other paper the San Jose
Mercury News in which he basically uh
said that a lot of what McCarthy did
appears to have been although excessive
not really so bad in blowback you
mentioned that the aforementioned craw
wolf ran on SS intelligence network
which was not only utilized by elements
of CIA but also by a fellow named John
ROM back to assist McCarthy right right
the the American intelligence community
was at that time and remains today split
the most basic split is between the CIA
and the civilians on the one hand and
Defense Intelligence Agency in the
military and the other hand that's a
oversimplification of course but but the
basic point that the the intelligence
community is split is beyond question at
that particular time it was even worse
and this man Frenchy gronbach who
inactive in military intelligence during
the war aspired to become the spy chief
of the United States and even people who
are espionage aficionados these days
really don't know very much about
Frenchy cronbach II but the fact is is
that at several points he had a pretty
good shot at doing that um and one of
the ways that he did that was to make
common cause with uh extreme
anti-communist elements that were
headquartered particularly at Georgetown
University in Washington who were very
influential in the in the Foreign
Service of the United States and also
made common cause with with other
military intelligence Colonels of the
far right that saw communists under
every bed and took rumors often from
highly dubious sources
some of them from Nazi German sources
some of them from the fascist regime of
a Franco in in Spain and and other
people of similar character and brought
them to to Washington as sources of
authoritative intelligence and then
leaked them to Joe McCarthy and this
became McCarthy's you know McCarthy has
kind of a funny career is that he was
not a big anti-communist crusader until
he had a series of meetings in the late
1940s with with with Frenchy gronbach
and and Edmond Walsh of Georgetown
University who is now remembered as a
big major major diplomatic figure who
basically told Joe McCarthy you want to
you want to be a big-time senator here's
the issue here's the issue to campaign
on and they were right so you know the
basic story of Joe McCarthy denouncing
innocent people and making extremely
irresponsible statements is well-known I
mean it's it's not it's not a secret the
word McCarthyism comes from from the the
kind of false accusations that that
McCarthy would make on the floor of the
Senate what's happening nowadays are one
of the things that's happening nowadays
is is that the FBI which is hardly a
neutral party in all of this has
Declassified some intercepted Russian
intelligence communication cables that
it had been gathering during the late
1940s the cables appear to be authentic
exactly the degree to which they've been
edited remains open to question it's
because as I say the FBI is not in any
sense
neutral party in the political debates
that that swirl around the treatment of
people during this time but nonetheless
the these cables on identify old people
who went to a peace rally organized by a
candidate for president in 1948 named
Henry Wallace Henry Wallace had been
vice president of the United States if
that wasn't any communist secret
communist conspirator for heaven's sakes
he's like Al Gore or Dan Quayle for that
matter the and a contention of those who
are inclined to to find to place the
entire blame for the Cold War on the
shoulders of the Soviets and to paint
the Americans as entirely innocent in
the Cold War has been to use these
cables as a you know the sort of the
latest device in a long-running debate
that goes back to nineteen forty five
it's as - oh it's your fault no it's
your fault oh it's your fault you know
that almost a childish today speaking of
the genesis of the Cold War Chris and
again forgive me for interrupting we've
only got a couple of minutes left
someone who also figures prominently
both in splendid blonde beast and in
blowback as well as in the formulation
of American Cold War policy is George
Kennan I wonder if you could give us a
synoptic overview of his role in both of
your books and in the Cold War realizing
that that's impossible right right right
Kennon is a very interesting character
it's because he starts out as a young
man he serves in the American Embassy in
Moscow he is uh he's well and he's quite
an intellectual at least he regards
himself as quite an intellectual and
[Music]
has the geopolitical aspirations that
are something like those of Henry
Kissinger to give you an idea he wants
to be the big fish in the pond when it
comes to America's grand strategy in the
world and he's quite quite an
opportunist as a young man and would
write a denunciation of what the
Russians are up to that appears in the
magazine of the Council on Foreign
Relations and is very influential in a
variety of ways in crystallizing the
liberal internationalist wing of the
government which is by far the stronger
by the way against normalized relations
with the Soviets now as far as the
far-right wing of the US government they
had you know I mean they they'd been
willing to go with to war by the Soviets
since 1917 so there wasn't there wasn't
much work to be done there but in
convincing them but it was the Liberals
of the Americans for democratic action
stripe who really had the power in the
country at the time and and Kenan was
play was instrumental in convincing them
that the way to go was a cold war
bankrolled by the American taxpayer
designed to contain quote-unquote
communism and to to use the military
expansion of the period as a as an
economic tool in the United States to to
achieve to to promote certain industries
and and to you know boost the economy
and and do this the sorts of
interest rate manipulation and so forth
we're down to our last 20 seconds here
we should mention just in closing that
tenon was a member of the Riga facts
that we spoke of also was the architect
of containment and perhaps in a future
discussion we can go into just what
containment theory was sure for Chris
Simpson this is dave emery saying thanks
for listening